

Topic Information
-----------------

Committee name
:   Advisory Council on Government Assets

Chair
:   Ed Clark, retired CEO of TD Bank Group

Committee members
:   Frances Lankin, Ellis Jacob, Janet Ecker, and David Denison

Committee mandate

:   The council will recommend ways to maximize the value and
    performance of Hydro One, OPG and the LCBO to help deliver on the
    multi-year targets set out in the 2014 Budget.

First appointed
:   April 11, 2014

First announcement of intention

:   October 17, 2014

Guiding principles

:   the public interest remains paramount and protected, decisions align
    with maximizing value to Ontarians, the decision process remains
    transparent, professional and independently validated.

Of interest

:   The president and CEO of Infrastructure Ontario is Bert Clark, Ed
    Clark's son.

History
-------

Asset Recycling is a new phrase describing corporatization,
marketization and privatization of government assets.

An asset is "recycled" when a government/corporation/bank either sells
or borrows against its physical assets to get money for investment in
new capital. Asset Recycling comes in various forms and can include or
be known as:

-   Partial privatization
-   Monetizing public assets
-   (Partial) Disinvestment
-   Re-mortgaging
-   Leveraging

The concept of "recycling" value from owned assets comes from the
financial sector in the 1980s as companies looked for new debt-driven
investment schemes. Right-wing governments started applying policies of
asset recycling in the mid-1990s in Europe and India as a way to reform
welfare economies. Pension funds and other private finance capital funds
are promoting for these kinds of partial privatizations as they push for
safe investment opportunities.

Asset recycling is being sold as an easy way that governments can get
more money for investment in new capital projects without increasing
taxes by using financial tools used by private sector corporations. The
private sector has access to many different financing mechanisms to take
on debt for investment in new capital. Those that promote asset
recycling are usually driven by these financial schemes in an effort to
relabel debt as something that does not appear as debt in budgets.

Asset recycling requires the set-up of an investment pool or
infrastructure trust. These pools of money or capital are set aside from
regular government budgets. They are borrowed against for funds for
specific capital projects. Governments can then invest in capital
projects which are to result in a financial return or savings for
government. These revenues or savings are then to help pay for the debt,
much like how corporations in the private sector economy operate. As
money comes back into the investment pool or capital projects are
finished, the investment pool is then borrowed against again -- or
recycled -- for other capital projects.

In theory, debt generated by asset recycling is paid-back through
private sector partners finding efficiencies or increased government
revenue driven increased economic growth. However, unlike leveraging
that occurs in the private sector, governments who are engaging in asset
recycling are not investing in productive revenue generating capital
projects. Also, roads and other transport infrastructure cannot be
"recycled" in the future, so investments like these are just a one-step
privatization process.

In practice, asset recycling is similar to other privatization schemes
-- such as public-private partnerships -- that cost governments more
money than traditional public debt financed investment. In addition,
management of public assets and services of government are based on
different models from commercial activities. For example, proponents of
asset recycling state that efficiencies come from involving private
sector expertise in reforming and modernizing public institutions.
However, many studies have shown negligible levels of efficiencies are
found through involving the private sector in delivery of public
services, undermining asset recycling proponent's main source of revenue
and benefit.

When the Australian Senate gutted the Abbot Government's asset recycling
bill, they simply re-titled the bill "Encouraging Privatization" to more
accurately reflect what the bill amounted to. Australia had to bribe its
states and municipalities to engage in public asset recycling with a
bonus of 15% in addition to the asset price. There is no benefit to the
public interest in paying to sell useful public assets for short-term
budget balancing.

Areas that would be subject to Asset Recycling include:

-   water infrastructure
-   waste water infrastructure
-   electricity utilities
-   toll roads
-   ports
-   public office buildings
-   crown corporations
-   liquor control board infrastructure
-   defence infrastructure

Mowat Report on Asset Recycling
-------------------------------

Asset recycling was first introduced to Ontario policy makers in Ontario
seriously by the a Mowat Centre report entitled "Recycling Ontario's
Assets: A New Framework for Managing Public Finances."

The Mowat report stated one of the problems with the current asset
management arrangement is the "lack of commercial expertise." Government
expertise in commercial knowledge is an obvious asset, but only if it is
modified to work in the interests of the public. Instead of
privatization, the government could invest in workers with asset
management skills that can be geared with the public interest in mind.

The other problems outlined in the study are either self-inflicted
through budgeting ideology or what unions would not consider problems at
all:

-   lack of capital
-   difficult to raise private capital
-   lack of long-term strategic plans
-   budget and tax rules (inhibiting privatization)
-   not knowing true value of an asset (on the private market)
-   pressure from stakeholders (such as union and general public)
-   absence of rigorous assessment frameworks (because of lack
    of expertise)
-   limited areas allow investment by pension funds

The Mowat report focuses on Australia's example but excludes examples
from the UK, Australia, Indonesia and India where partial privatizations
have not resulted in the promised benefits. Many of these other examples
ignored by the report show that asset sales are not guaranteed to
generated the desired amount of capital, do not reduce risk to the
public sector and to not lead to the kind of efficiencies promised. In
many cases the level of inefficiency in government managed
infrastructure are overstated and returns much lower.

The Mowat report's reasons for acting now -- such as low interest rates
-- are also reasons for the government to engage in more traditional and
cheaper forms of borrowing. The report also highlights some of the
reasons that corporations would be interested in buying or investing in
public assets including that many government utilities operate in as a
monopoly. So, while promoting asset recycling as a way to find
efficiencies private sector involvement, Mowat is promoting asset
recycling to private companies by saying they would benefit from fewer,
not more, market forces constraining their profits. It is contradictory
and incorrect to say that monopoly public monopolies cost consumers and
taxpayers more than private monopolies and that competition will drive
efficiency in areas of natural monopoly such as energy utilities.

From the Mowat report: "The ability of a purchaser of a public asset to
acquire a public monopoly (or an entity operating within a protected
regime) further enhances the value of the asset (and the bid price)."

BC Asset Sales Example
----------------------

The British Columbia Auditor General's 2014 report highlights how the BC
Liberal Government balanced its books with a record breaking \$601
million sale of government assets. BC's AG stated that there is no
revenue to be gained after the sales are complete. This, in effect, robs
future budgets to balance the current budget. In addition, with most
partial asset sales, the future costs of maintenance and upgrades are
still on the public dime.

Asset recycling is a similar to these asset sales in that it robs future
budgets to balance the current one and the government gives-up some
ability to generate revenue and regulate. The BC AG's report also
highlights how P3's (similar to asset recycling in its relationship to
privatization) have increased borrowing costs (interest rates) from 4%
to 7.5%. This means it would have been much cheaper to borrow through
traditional public debt mechanisms to build publicly owned
infrastructure.

A bit of an edit.
